
---
title: Lightweight Virtualized Domains
aliases:
- /lvds

ShowReadingTime: false
---

<img src="images/lvds.png" alt="LVDs Architecture" width="550"/>

Commodity operating systems execute core kernel subsystems in a single address
space along with hundreds of dynamically loaded extensions and device drivers.
Lack of isolation within the kernel implies that a vulnerability in any of the
kernel subsystems or device drivers opens a way to mount a successful attack on
the entire kernel.

Historically, isolation within the kernel remained prohibitive due to the high
cost of hardware isolation primitives. Recent CPUs, however, bring a new set of
mechanisms. Extended page-table (EPT) switching with VM functions and memory
protection keys (MPKs) provide memory isolation and invocations across
boundaries of protection domains with overheads comparable to system calls.
Unfortunately, neither MPKs nor EPT switching provide architectural support for
isolation of privileged ring 0 kernel code, i.e., control of privileged
instructions and well-defined entry points to securely restore state of the
system on transition between isolated domains.

LVDs develop a collection of techniques for lightweight isolation of privileged
kernel code. To control execution of privileged instructions, we rely on a
minimal hypervisor that transparently deprivileges the system into a non-root
VT-x guest. We develop a new isolation boundary that leverages extended page
table (EPT) switching with the VMFUNC instruction. We define a set of
invariants that allows us to isolate kernel components in the face of an
intricate execution model of the kernel, e.g., provide isolation of
preemptable, concurrent interrupt handlers. To minimize overheads of
virtualization, we develop support for exitless interrupt delivery across
isolated domains.

# Publications

\[**Best paper award**\] Vikram Narayanan, Yongzhe Huang, Gang Tan, Trent
Jaeger, and Anton Burtsev. **Lightweight Kernel Isolation with Virtualization
and VM Functions**. In _16th ACM SIGPLAN/SIGOPS International Conference on
Virtual Execution Environments (VEE 20)_, March 2020.
[pdf](https://mars-research.github.io/static/doc/lvds-vee20.pdf)

# Code

LVDs are available as two git repositories:

The hypervisor: [lvd-bareflank](https://github.com/mars-research/lvd-bflank)

LVDs-compatible Linux kernel: [lvd-linux](https://github.com/mars-research/lvd-linux)
